# Project: Data Warehouse for Sparkify 
Sparkify is a music streaming startup that has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.
In this project we will build ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. 
## Project Datasets: 
There are two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

`Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data
Log data json path: s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json`

### 1.Song Data :
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

`song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json`

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

`{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}`

### 2.Log Data:
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

## Project Steps:
In this project we will use Amazon Web Services. The project will go through the following steps :
1. Design schemas for the fact and dimension tables.
2. Write SQL queries to create those tables and the staging tables and not to forget to write the  DROP statment of those tables to be able to reset the database and test the ETL pipeline.
3. Write the COPY statemnt to load the data from S3 into the staging tables. 
4. Write INSERT queries to insert data into the final dimensional tables.

**All the above steps will be written in a file named `sql_queries.py`** 
5. Go to AWS and Create an IAM role that has read access to S3.
6. Launch a redshift cluster by runing the file IaC.ipynb and add redshift database and IAM role info to the file named `dwh.cfg` which is a file  that includes all cluster, S3 , IAM role, AWS and the datawarehouse configrations. 
7. Run the file named `create_tables.py` to create your staging and dimensional tables. 
8. Go to AWS and check the table schemas in your redshift database. You can use Query Editor in the AWS Redshift console for this.
9. After you make sure that your tables are created succsuflly, run the file etl.py to load the data from S3 to the staging tables on Redshift and then from Redshift to the dimensional tables that you created. 
10. Go to AWS and query some of your tables to make sure that they have been filled successfully. 
11. Delete your redshift cluster when finished.

### Designed Database Schema:
Using the song and event datasets, we will create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

#### 1.Fact Table :
1. songplays - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong : songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

#### 2.Dimension Tables :
1. users - users in the app : user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
2. songs - songs in music database : song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
3. artists - artists in music database : artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude
4. time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units : start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday
